---
title: Hackers in the bazaar
date: 2025-08-31T10:00:25-04:00
summary: "Reflections for course readings"
url: "/tech/Hackers-in-the-bazaar"
showtoc: true
canonicalURL: "https://tommy.me/HackersInTheBazaar"
tags: ["Hackers"]
draft: false
cover:
  image: "/tommy.me/posts/tech/hackers/pictures/hackers.jpg"
  alt: "Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution"
  caption: ""
---

# Hackers in the bazaar

This are my reflections for the ND computer science elective "Hackers in the bazaar", taught by Prof. Bui.
The first book we are reading is "Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution", by Steven Levy. This covers the content of the first 3 readings. Second, we are reading
Paul Graham's essays from "Hackers and Painters".

## Reflection 1: True Hackers

The idea of a true hacker is the main focus of the first few chapters of the book. It is shown through many examples that hackers are those who feel a need to learn through building and tinkering with whatever they may be interested in, regardless of rules or boundaries. The idea of a hacker is built on the thesis that all information and tools to obtain information should be open and free to access.

An example of this mentality is the Midnight Requisitioning Committee. This was a subgroup of the Tech Model Railroad Club who would go out at night and steal the supplies they needed. All this was justified with the idea that they needed these supplies for learning and therefore they should be available to them. This highlights the moral stance of the hacker ethic which favors the independent, “decentralized” hacker, rather than big organizations like MIT or IBM. The TMRC could justify their behavior with the idea that _“All information should be free”_ and _“Mistrust authority–Promote Decentralization.”_

This is especially shown with the way the TMRC views IBM. They describe the company as overly bureaucratic and full of “batch-processed people” who could never understand the value in a decentralized system. While the hacker ethic does an excellent job promoting learning and development of technological art and innovation, I find it has a tendency to undervalue the importance of organizations such as IBM. All the machinery that the Tech Model Railroad Club was so fascinated with was produced by one of these bureaucratic, centralized organizations. This is shown by the clear disapproval of both IBM and NASA by members of the TMRC. Even though IBM was a company which worked on some of the most advanced computing technology of the time, their workers were looked down upon by the club and almost discredited as scientists. A similar thing happened with NASA. One member of the AI Lab is characterized by saying he “...had disdained NASA’s humanwave approach toward things.” Ultimately, it becomes clear from NASA’s success that there are methods other than the Hacker Ethic that can yield incredible results. In fact, it seems that oftentimes the Hacker Ethic promotes learning and cool “art”-style tech projects, but fails to bring about large-scale, advanced community projects—things that require some degree of bureaucracy and organization.

---

The portrayal of a “true hacker” in this book certainly differs from my view of the modern hacker. Aside from the obvious differences between the book’s hacker and the Hollywood hacker, I think the book highlights a clear culture shift in the tech world over the last 60–70 years. The modern student of computer science participates in organized hackathons led by large companies, dreams of landing a FAANG job and making lots of money while only working 6 hours a day. Steven Levy’s hacker is someone who seeks out projects independently, and works on them only for the goals of learning and building something cool. There was no idea of working on something to display on GitHub or bolster your résumé. Hacks were pursued out of passion and a desire to learn.

The new culture in tech isn’t all bad. It has led to a much more welcoming environment where the barrier to entry is low. More people have access to more information and a larger community than ever before. Unfortunately, I believe that this has somewhat diluted the passion that used to be present. Since information is so much easier to get, there are far fewer cases of people going to the lengths we see the TMRC go to. The result of this is a loss in the learning that comes from aimlessly tinkering or even just trying to understand a system with little guidance.

I think this 1950s idea of the “true hacker” is an excellent guideline of how passionate we should be for something if we really care about understanding it fully. Rather than focusing on how we can use LLMs to extract the maximum value out of the job market or put together a startup with enough buzzwords to get into YC, a return to Levy’s hacker ideology would reignite a passion in the tech world that has somewhat diminished.

---

## Reflection 2: Hardware Hackers

At the heart of hacking there are a few certain qualities that are necessary to be a skilled, effective hacker; tech curiosity and being comfortable engaging with things they don’t (yet) understand. The “True Hackers” and “Hardware Hackers” both showed these qualities. They were happy to dive into complex systems that seemed intimidating and demystify it through the “hands-on imperative”. Where they differ is in what they believe technology should be used for and who the right people to use it were. The true hackers had a bit of an elite-ism view to their work. While it is true they were accepting to any hackers, they looked down on those they didn’t consider to be hackers. This grew tensions between them and the “Hardware Hackers” who wanted to bring computers to the general person. This mentality still persists today to some extent. People in tech (and STEM fields in general) tend to have a superiority complex and view themselves as smarter than other fields. I think most ND CS majors, including myself, have made fun of Mendoza majors in playful conversation. Part of the hacker culture is one of pride, which can be good when it is used as motivation for projects, but can be harmful when egos get too inflated.

Building and selling personal computers was a huge step in breaking down the elitist mentality amongst hackers. By giving regular people access to this equipment, they pushed the hacker ethic farther than the “true hackers” were willing to take it. We see now, ~50 years later, CS classes are filled with more “Mendoza type” students than ever before. People who might not have been drawn to CS if it kept the culture, it once had. Financial motives have also been a big driver of this and a large source of tension. On one hand, commercialization made computers more widely available. On the other hand, it introduced values that clashed with openness and sharing such as, secrecy, and competition. We have certainly seen some dangerous effects of this such as predatory tactics in social media to keep us addicted to our phones, and Orwellian data surveillance on a global scale, but we have also seen an historic rise in the ability to connect with others, help the less fortunate, and a general improvement in the base quality of life. I think it is very interesting to examine the political background in cases like Lee Felsenstein and how that may have influenced his view of the hacker ethic. We see all over the world technology being used as a tool for liberation like Lee hoped it would be, with projects that give access to literature that is banned in certain countries, or free classes to people who otherwise would not be able to access them. Unfortunately, with this comes cases like the CCP, where citizens are watched constantly and their freedoms have been largely stripped away. Like any other tool, it comes down to how the user choses to act. Ultimately, I believe in Lee’s view of technology as a tool for liberation more so than Efrem Lipkin’s view of it as a tool for oppression. While it hasn’t all been good, the general quality of life for the average human has improved, I believe in part to technology brought about by the hacker ethic.

---

## Reflection 3: Game Hackers

The question of whether commercialization ruins what is considered art is nothing new. This comes up in traditional art like painting and sculptures and is just as relevant when talking about the original ethos of the **“Hacker Ethic”**. I believe that while the true hacker is no longer the most common type of coder or hardware hacker, there is still ample room for the classic hacker to thrive in tech.

There is a new, very modern type of “hotshot programmer” who studies for competitive coding competitions, goes to FAANG networking events, and has a main goal of maximizing their total comp, but in my experience these people are not doing the same type or quality of work as the people who still embody the classic “Hacker Ethic”. Even with lots of online resources and entire college curriculums built to teach computer science, there is a resounding agreement that those who study computer science with the goal to make a lot of money tend to be less successful. There seems to be a requirement that to be a good programmer or hacker, you must be passionate. This shows that the core of the hacker ethic is still alive and well.

But does being a better hacker or programmer actually help when you are on the job? I have never worked in big tech but I spent this summer (and will be returning full time) at a hedge fund in NYC. One of the things I loved about this job was the spirit that _if you can do something cool, that makes money, do it._ This idea has two important parts:

1. If you can do something cool, then do it.
2. It must make money.

I loved the idea that if I had an idea for a project or feature that I wanted to build, I could just go and build it. From what I’ve heard, in big tech it is very common to work on a big project that never ends up shipping. People spend months working on small things that are specifically requested by users with very specific and rigid requirements only for it to never be used. In my case, if I wanted to make something cool, I could just do it according to my own specifications.

The second part is an important clarification. This is where the capitalist worldview meets the hacker ethic. While I could work on cool stuff, it had to be motivated by making money. This does lead to some really cool projects but still restricts us from certain things. Despite that, we are big investors in things that the original, true hackers would support—projects and companies that might not make money now but have the potential to turn into something profitable in an expected way.

This is what motivates my belief that capitalistic motives are a **net positive** for the survival of the hacker ethic. While it doesn’t exactly lead to the same type of hacking as what we saw in the 50’s and 60’s in Part 1, there is still a huge push for building cool projects that might not have direct financial motives. People will always have a desire to work on cool projects no matter what economic factors exist. The hacker ethic is intrinsic to human nature, and will always persist.

---

## Reflection 4: Nerds and Hackers

In Paul Graham’s essay “Why Nerd Are Unpopular” he does his best to explain exactly what trait nerds have the make them the target of social ostracization. His explanation is “that they don't really want to be popular”. He also dismisses the idea that popular kids are just “envious” of nerds for being smart. I think he makes good arguments for these ideas but is missing some nuance. I don’t believe nerds are always the best students in class or most naturally gifted people. A nerd is more of a statement of someone hobbies and interests than it is their intelligence. So, while they may not want to be popular, it has nothing to do with being smart, but everything to do with having hobbies like D&D or sci-fi movies instead of sports or fashion. Paul Graham’s analysis on why this causes a social rift is very in line with classic media portrayals of teenagers and he makes the comparison to Lord of the Flies. Maybe I grew up in a different time, but I think Paul Graham is a bit harsh on teenagers. Growing up, I was always pretty nerdy; president of the computer science club, loved all my STEM classes, enjoyed reading, and would hang out with my favorite teachers after school even when I didn’t need help. Despite that, I had a very smooth time navigating the social circles in High School. I had a great group of friends and never experienced any of the cruel teenage torture that Paul Graham talks about. Maybe I got lucky, but I think kids have gotten more accepting as the internet has made “nerdy” hobbies like gaming and comic books more mainstream.

When Paul goes on to talk compare hackers to painters, I start to disagree with his beliefs. He gives a distinction of 3 types of tech people: Mathematicians, algorithms and application developers, and hackers. His belief is that hackers are more similar to painters than to mathematicians. However, I think great hackers are very similar to mathematicians. This may be a product of me being a math student as well as studying CS, but in all the most beautiful projects I have seen, there is an element of mathematical thinking that makes it so elegant. Mathematics teaches people to start from pure basics and from there build something useful (depending on your definition of useful) by only making small, easy to understand steps. This reminds me of a famous algorithm for computing square roots that was used in the game Quake III, where in only about 10 lines of code, a developer wrote one of the most efficient ways to compute the square root of a number. At first glance, the purpose of the code is incomprehensible, with weird type casts and bit operations, but by just going step by step through the basics, it isn’t too hard to understand. To me, this is a very mathematical approach rather than that of an artist. There is still an art to work like this, but it isn’t the same as what is produced by a painter or musician.

---

## Reflection 5: Programming Languages

The idea that the language you use changes how you solve problems presents some interesting questions. Over the last year I’ve learned to speak Hungarian. Other than a little Spanish, this is the only language I speak other than English. What is so cool about Hungarian is that it is an incredibly unique language and has a very rich history. When I was studying in Budapest, I used it every day since many Hungarians don’t speak English. I finally understood what people, especially those who are bilingual, mean when they talk about ideas that are only expressible in a certain language. I never thought of this as a factor in the world of programming languages as well. When I was studying cryptography, I wanted to implement an elliptic curve encryption algorithm using C, my favorite language. My first thought was how am I going to build data structures to represent elliptic curves and the operations that can be done on them. In a language like python, I could create a class and override the math functions for addition and multiplication. In C, I needed to represent each elliptic curve as a struct of its three parameters and create functions for the math operations. My takeaway from building this project was that it is very important to understand exactly what data will be used often, and what operations need to be efficient to compute. Had I done this in python, I don’t think I would have needed to think about the data organization as much, which may have detracted from my understanding of the algorithm. Paul Graham believes that the language you pick has a profound impact on the quality of what you can create. One thing he talks about is how Lisp allowed Viaweb to iterate incredibly quickly and beat competitors to new features. This is certainly a huge benefit for some languages. In every industry, speed will be a valuable asset. That being said, I haven’t had the experience that some things are possible in one language but not another. More difficult, sure, but not impossible. You probably wouldn’t chose to create a 3D FPS game from scratch in C, but my point is there is a certain class of languages for certain jobs, and each has its pros and cons.

One of the fastest growing programming languages is Rust. It has features that make it safer than C while still having the speed and efficiency that C offers. However, Rust has one of the steepest learning curves. It doesn’t have the rapid prototyping abilities that python offers and the Paul Graham loves. Still, tons of code is being converted to Rust and tons of new projects are being done in Rust. This just goes to show you that there are many tradeoffs when it comes to picking a language and sometimes there is no “right” choice.

When it comes to the idea of programming languages having varying levels of power, I think the conversation still needs to center around these tradeoffs. Is C “more powerful” than python because it is much faster, or is python “more powerful” because it is easier to get something meaningful up and running? I think, like any interesting question, the answer is it depends. If you are building a high frequency trading system, or an operating system, C is going to be “more powerful” than python. The opposite is true if you are looking to write scripts for a hobbyist ham radio or satellite project. I don’t think “more powerful” is the correct way to compare (serious) languages. Like any tool, it depends on the job. At a glance you might say a chainsaw is more powerful than a screwdriver, but is a chainsaw more powerful than a screwdriver if you need to fix a cabinet? Like any job, the most important step is laying out requirements and finding the right tools.

---

## Reflection 6: Wealth Creation

I think focusing on getting rich often leads to the opposite traits of those which actually make you rich. Most of the time, when you see someone who has become rich by a direct result of their own work, it is because they are incredibly passionate about it. They usually don’t start out by saying, “what can I do that makes me rich?” but rather they have a passion or idea that they pursue to the extreme. Paul Graham says that working on a startup is like trading 40 years or moderately difficult work for 4 years of extreme work. While this might be true, working for 4 years in that way on a startup you aren’t passionate about just doesn’t work. There is no person who can do incredible work on something they don’t find incredible. So, when people say that they want to get rich, they should really be asking what they are willing to work extremely hard on. Beyond this, there is an element of luck that comes with it. Paul Graham talks about this with the case of Bill Gates. In Malcom Gladwell’s book The Outliers, he also examines Bill Gate’s story. He describes an idea of luck meeting preparation. It takes 10,000 hours to become an expert in something, but still, you need to get lucky to really make it. In Bill Gates case he was lucky enough to grow up near a university that had a computer, and he was able to access it since his father worked there. Later when he was working on Microsoft, Paul mentions how he got lucky with the poor decisions made by IBM but took excellent advantage of it. It’s the classic idea of preparation meets opportunity.

When it comes to having the right qualities to be successful, I truly believe that they all stem from passion. Someone will not be able to be persistent, or even obstinate, if they lack passion. The first ingredient to a successful startup is an idea backed by passion. Inevitably, someone will get burnt out if they are working to the point of exhaustion on something they aren’t in love with. I think this is why so many founders don’t have a good relationship with school. School requires a lot of work on things you aren’t passionate about. This can be a good skill, like when I had to implement a doubly linked list in RISC-V. I certainly wasn’t passionate about that assignment, but it did teach me a lot about computer architecture that has been useful in the work that I am passionate in. These experiences have made me believe that there is a valuable balance between getting really good at the things I love, and slogging through the things I might not.

---

## Reflection 7: The Cathedral vs The Bazaar

My job this summer exposed me to both models of software development, the cathedral and the bazaar. One project I was assigned was entirely self-contained and built using the cathedral model. It was fairly small, taking about a week of work, and I was the only developer working on it. It worked really well for this type of project, especially since as an intern I wanted to create a finished product with full working features and no bugs before I presented it to my boss. I enjoyed working like this, since I got to be proud of what I presented at the end. I wrote all the code, made all the design choices, and fixed all the bugs myself. For my larger internship projects, I was working on apps that had been in production for at least a year, working alongside multiple developers. For these, we followed the bazaar model of development. I was working on code that was written by people who no longer worked at the company. One of the senior engineers on my team gave me great advice: If you don’t understand something, read it through, then ask for guidance before spending hours deciphering someone else’s old code. Since he had been around for much longer than me and had experience with this code base, I could ask him questions about the code that he could answer immediately, instead of spending hours reading and debugging code. Based on this experience and from the projects in my coursework, both methods of development have their uses, but the bazaar may be more applicable to large projects, spanning many people and long periods of time.
I like ESR’s eight principle the most. He writes,

8. Given a large enough beta-tester and co-developer base, almost every problem will be characterized quickly and the fix obvious to someone.

I really enjoy this idea of getting a product into people’s hands as fast as possible and using them to help you continue development. I have often found that the best way to find issues with my projects or brainstorm possible improvements is to show other people. It’s really easy to get tunnel vision when designing and coding a program and lose sight of things that may make it better. Other people bring a fresh perspective and explaining it to them can make you realize what is missing. This is very similar to the classic rubber ducky method of debugging. Especially when your users are made up of “beta-testers and co-developers”, they can help move production along faster, and to a better product, than just one person developing alone.

---

## Reflection 8: The Noosphere, The Magic Cauldron

ESR begins this section by explaining the different types of hackers. These ideologies differ by their dedication to the open source as a development method along with their hostility towards commercial software. This was an interesting idea to me since I always just saw people as interested / dedicated to open source or not interested / indifferent. But, ESR’s distinction does make sense, as there are certainly people who work a full-time tech job who also are highly active in the open-source community. I think this is part of the reason that the open-source world has seen such great success. There are people from all nine of the hacker belief backgrounds that ESR defined that come together to contribute to the same project. Someone with extensive experience at a FAANG company can work with a grad student or a hobbyist can work on something they’re interested in and make meaningful contributions. Along with this, there are ESR’s list of taboos. I think these are generally a good tool for guidance with open-source projects, however I don’t fully understand the need for the “strong social pressure against forking projects”. On one hand, I get that it might be more difficult to divide a community into two projects when it would be easier to come to a compromise and keep everyone on board the project, but it also doesn’t seem like a bad idea to create two projects that approach a similar idea from different viewpoints.

ESR goes on to talk about the idea of a hacker “gift culture”. I think his analysis doesn’t properly highlight the largest ingredient in a gift culture like this one – time. He compares contributing to an open-source project to a millionaire throwing a party. I don’t think this is an accurate comparison, since when they throw a party it’s really just a gift of money, since they are usually hiring people to do the set-up. With open-source development it is a gift of code, but it also comes with the many hours that goes into creating it. This means that someone with a demanding full-time job probably won’t have time to contribute to a meaningful open-source project. Even a researcher who is an expert in their field might not be able to give back to the community due to a lack of time. This means that whatever work goes into an open-source contribution must be worth a significant time donation. ESR’s idea of “ego satisfaction” is a good explanation for this, but I don’t think it is enough to explain the success of the open-source community. In the end, I think a great deal of this success needs to be in part attributed to the love that software engineers have for their craft.

---

## Reflection 9: The Birth of a (Nerd|OS)

Linus Torvalds didn’t seem to have a particularly enjoyable or special childhood, or at least that’s how he remembers and recounts it. The way he describes his time in school is very plain and he seems to be caught up on the awkward parts of growing up rather than any of the exciting stuff. His relationship to his family also doesn’t come off as a source of joy in his life. While he doesn’t have a bad relationship with his immediate family, it doesn’t seem like he has created any strong, close connections with them. His relationship with his grandfather is clearly very influential, and even though Linus doesn’t describe them as especially close, he was introduced to computers and learn a lot through him. This is an example of how some people get lucky with exposure to certain things at a young age. Especially at that time, this was a rare opportunity and obviously set Linus on a path that would influence his whole life. He also speaks very little about friends from his early childhood. He clearly was only interested in people who were also interested in computers, which severely limited his selection pool.

In the second chapter, Linus talks about starting his time at university. He described his first year in a way that seems familiar to my current year at Notre Dame, “I simply found myself lacking a project to do on my computer. Lack a project and you lack enthusiasm”. In my senior year, I have found that I’m much less interested in my coursework, and I can’t really find a project that interests me enough. Partly this might be because I want to use my last opportunities to go to all the home and away games this season, or see the Scubbs play, or just enjoy the last year where I’ll be living at a house with a shared backyard with my 12 closest friends. It is somewhat comforting to hear that this is a shared experience. Surprisingly, it makes me look forward to starting work, since I enjoyed it so much over the summer and it provides a really interesting set of problems to work on while still giving a lot of flexibility in the topics I work with. In Linus’ case, he found an interesting project when exposed to a course covering C and Unix. This is somewhat similar to me, but in my case, it was cryptography. Unfortunately, jobs in cryptography are hard to come by with only a bachelor’s degree and research positions seem unlikely to work well with my tendencies to spend a lot of money. Hopefully, I’ll continue to love the projects I get to work on when I start my full-time career.

---

## Reflection 10: King of the Ball

It seems to be that Linux’s success is in part due to luck in factors outside of the foundations control, and a big part due to its incredible usefulness. Like any successful person, business, or project, luck will always be a factor. My favorite theory / philosophy about this comes from Malcolm Gladwell’s book Outliers. He uses the example of Bill Gates, who was lucky enough to not only live near a state-of-the-art computer for the time, but also get access through a family member (his father, if I remember correctly) who worked at the university where it was housed. In a similar way, Linus started working on a project that was introduced to him through a course at his university, and it was at a time when there was a huge need for an operating system like Linux. On the other hand, Linus created an incredible tool that allowed computer scientists, coders, and tech hobbyists to engage with computer systems in a way that was completely new and needed.

This is certainly the best example of how powerful hackers in the bazaar can be. Linux expresses his appreciation for this since it lets him only worry about the things he cares about and let others do the work that he doesn’t want to do. Even he seemed a bit surprised that this model worked out. I think with a project as interesting and provocative as Linux this is something that can be counted on, but it is not necessarily a given for any open-source project. Many projects just aren’t interesting enough to get finished without some monetary incentives. At the end of the day, Linux is a great example of how powerful open source can be, but not every project is Linux.
